MIT 8.01 Physics I: Classical Mechanics - Fall 1999

Lecture 3: Vectors - Dot Products - Cross Products - 3D Kinematics

This lecture was recorded by Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT

author: Walter H. G. Lewin, Center for Future Civic Media

published: Oct. 10, 2008,   recorded: September 1999,   views: 10907

released under terms of: CC BY-NC-SA 

Description
1. Vectors - Direction Distinguishes Vectors from Scalars

2. Decomposition of a Vector:
A vector can be projected onto three coordinate axes x,y,z, along which 
lie unit vectors (denoted with roofs). Professor Lewin works an example.

3. Scalar Product:
The "dot" product of two vectors is a scalar. A scalar can be positive, 
negative or zero and we'll use it later in the course to calculate work 
and energy. Professor Lewin calculates "A dot B" in a couple of examples.

4. Vector Product:
The cross product (also called vector product) of two vectors results 
in a vector. Professor Lewin presents two methods for calculating it. 
A cross product of the vectors A and B is always perpendicular to both 
A and B. The direction is easily found using the right-hand corkscrew 
rule. We'll use cross products to calculate torques and angular momentum 
later in the course. Always use Right Handed coordinate systems, x-hat 
cross y-hat gives z-hat. If you don't, you'll get into trouble for which 
you will have to pay dearly.

5. Decomposition of 3D Vectors r, v and a:
Professor Lewin writes the equations for position (r), velocity (v) and 
acceleration (a) showing their projection onto the x,y,z axes, and he 
introduces a shorthand notation for time derivatives. 3D motion can be 
reduced to three 1D motions which can greatly simplify matters.

6. Projectile Motion in the Vertical Plane:
Professor Lewin throws an object up, and decomposes its initial velocity 
into a horizontal and a vertical direction. If air drag can be ignored, 
the horizontal velocity remains constant. Gravitational acceleration is 
only in the vertical direction and is not affected by the horizontal motion. 
This acceleration is constant in the lecture hall if air drag can be ignored 
(see Lecture 12).