MIT 8.01 Physics I: Classical Mechanics - Fall 1999

Lecture 23: Doppler Effect - Binary Stars - Neutron Stars and Black Holes

This lecture was recorded by Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT

author: Walter H. G. Lewin, Center for Future Civic Media

published: Oct. 10, 2008,   recorded: November 1999,   views: 2946

released under terms of: CC BY-NC-SA 

Description
1. Doppler Shift with Sound Waves - Circular Orbits:

The received frequency changes if the source of sound moves towards or 
away from an observer. This is the Doppler Effect, demonstrated by Professor 
Lewin with a tuning fork. The fractional change in frequency reveals the 
velocity component along your line of sight to the moving sound source. If the 
source of sound is in circular motion, and if the observer is somewhere in the 
orbital plane, you can determine the orbital radius and the speed of the source 
in its orbit. This is demonstrated with a rotating wind organ.

2. Doppler Shift of Electromagnetic Radiation:

Electromagnetic radiation travels at the speed of light, c, in vacuum. If a source 
of light has a velocity component towards you, the frequencies that you will observe 
will be higher than those of the emitted radiation, and the received wavelengths will 
be shorter (blue-shift) than the emitted wavelengths. If the source is receding from you 
the received wavelength is longer (red-shift). The spectroscopic Doppler shift is used by 
astronomers to measure the radial velocity of emitters and absorbers of light.

3. Star Mass Determinations from Doppler Shift:

A binary star system consists of a pair of stars orbiting about their center of mass. 
By measuring the Doppler shifts of both stars as a function of time, you can determine 
the orbital period, the radial velocity of each star and, if the observer is located in 
the orbital plane, the orbital radii can be found for both stars. The orbital radii and 
Kepler's third Law determine the total mass of the system, enabling the determination of 
each star's mass separately.

4. X-ray Binary Systems:

In an X-ray binary system, there is a neutron star (or black hole) pulling matter off its 
donor companion. Matter spirals toward the neutron star, and potential energy is converted 
to kinetic energy. This, coupled with the high mass transfer rate between the pair, generates 
tremendous power and astronomical temperatures (it radiates mainly X-rays). The accreting 
ionized matter gets funnelled onto hot spots by the neutron star's magnetic field, which spins 
with the neutron star (making it an X-ray pulsar). Doppler shifts in the pulsar period and 
X-ray eclipses can provide orbital parameters (and masses) for the stellar system.

5. Black Holes:

A black hole is a massive object with no size, but with a characteristic surface called the event 
horizon from within which nothing can escape the black hole. In black-hole binary systems the 
accreting matter radiates X-rays as it approaches the event horizon of the black hole, but the black 
hole has no surface, therefore does not exhibit a pulsar-like behavior. You can measure the optical 
Doppler shift of the donor star, and from its spectrum estimate the donor's mass. This then leads to 
the mass of the accretor. If this mass is in excess of about 3 solar masses, it is believed to be a 
black hole. Cygnus X-1 was the first such discovery (in 1972). Its black hole is about 10 solar masses.